# Trade-offs between carbon stocks and biodiversity in European temperate

 forests

Sabatini* F.M., de Andrade R.B., Paillet Y., Ódor P., Bouget C., Campagnaro T., Gosselin F., Janssen P.,

Mattioli W., Nascimbene J., Sitzia T., Kuemmerle T., Burrascano S.

### Author affiliations and ORCID:

Sabatini, Francesco Maria. 1) Geography Department, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Unter den Linden 6,

10099 Berlin, Germany. 2) German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) - Halle-Jena
Leipzig; 3) - Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Institut für Biologie, Am Kirchtor 1, 06108, Halle

(Saale). Germany. ORCID: 0000-0002-7202-7697. * Corresponding author:

francesco.sabatini@botanik.uni-halle.de

de Andrade, Rafael Barreto. Sapienza, University of Rome. P.le Aldo Moro 5, 00165 Rome, Italy. ORCID:

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7976-7647

Paillet, Yoan. Irstea, UR EFNO, Domaine des Barres, 45290 Nogent sur Vernisson, France. ORCID: 0000
0001-7232-7844

Ódor, Peter. MTA Centre for Ecological Research, Institute of Ecology and Botany, H-2163 Vácrátót,

Alkotmány u. 2-4., Hungary. ORCID: 0000-0003-1729-8897

Bouget, Christophe. Irstea, UR EFNO, Domaine des Barres, 45290 Nogent sur Vernisson, France. ORCID:

0000-0002-5206-7560

Campagnaro, Thomas, Department of Land, Environment, Agriculture and Forestry, Università degli Studi di

Padova, I-35020 Legnaro (PD), Italy. thomas.campagnaro@unipd.it ORCID: 0000-0002-6307-6892


-----

Gosselin, Frédéric. Irstea, UR EFNO, Domaine des Barres, 45290 Nogent sur Vernisson, France. ORCID :

0000-0003-3737-106X

Janssen, Philippe. Université Grenoble-Alpes, Irstea, UR LESSEM, 2 rue de la Papeterie BP 76, 38402 Saint
Martin-d’Hères, France. ORCID: 0000-0003-3310-0078

Mattioli, Walter. Council for Agricultural Research and Economics, Research Centre for Forestry and Wood

(CREA-FL), v.le Santa Margherita 80, I-52100 Arezzo (AR), Italy, walter.mattioli@crea.gov.it. ORCID:

0000-0003-2107-1038

Nascimbene, Juri. University of Bologna, Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences,

via Irnerio 42, 40126 Bologna. ORCID: 0000-0002-9174-654X.

Sitzia, Tommaso. Department of Land, Environment, Agriculture and Forestry, Università degli Studi di

Padova, I-35020 Legnaro (PD), Italy. tommaso.sitzia@unipd.it. ORCID: 0000-0001-6221-4256

Kuemmerle, Tobias. 1) Geography Department, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Unter den Linden 6, 10099

Berlin, Germany 2) Integrative Research Institute for Human Environment Transformation (IRI THESys),

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany. ORCID: 0000-0002-9775
142X

Burrascano, Sabina. Sapienza, University of Rome. P.le Aldo Moro 5, 00165 Rome, Italy. ORCID:

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6537-3313

### Running head:

Carbon-biodiversity trade-offs in forests

### Keywords:

Biodiversity conservation; carbon storage, climate-change mitigation, community thresholds, land sparing;

multi-taxonomic diversity, trade-off species, win-win species

### Word count: 

5514


-----

## Abstract

Policies to mitigate climate change and biodiversity loss often assume that protecting carbon-rich forests

provides co-benefits in terms of biodiversity, due to the spatial congruence of carbon stocks and

biodiversity at biogeographic scales. However, it remains unclear whether this holds at the scales relevant

for management, with particularly large knowledge gaps for temperate forests and for taxa other than

trees. We built a comprehensive dataset of Central European temperate forest structure and multi
taxonomic diversity (beetles, birds, bryophytes, fungi, lichens, and plants) across 352 plots. We used

Boosted Regression Trees to assess the relationship between above-ground live carbon stocks and (a)

taxon-specific richness, (b) a unified multidiversity index. We used Threshold Indicator Taxa ANalysis to

explore individual species’ responses to changing above-ground carbon stocks and to detect change-points

in species composition along the carbon-stock gradient. Our results reveal an overall weak and highly

variable relationship between richness and carbon stock at the stand scale, both for individual taxonomic

groups and for multidiversity. Similarly, the proportion of win-win and trade-off species (i.e. species that

respectively increase or decrease with increasing carbon) varied substantially across taxa. Win-win species

gradually replaced trade-off species with increasing carbon, without clear thresholds along the above
ground carbon gradient, suggesting that aggregate indices (e.g. richness) might fail to detect these changes.

Collectively, our analyses highlight that leveraging co-benefits between carbon and biodiversity in

temperate forest may require stand-scale management that prioritizes either biodiversity conservation or

carbon-storage in order to maximize co-benefits at broader scales. Importantly, this contrasts from tropical

forests, where climate and biodiversity objectives may be effectively integrated at the stand-scale, thus

highlighting the need for context-specificity when managing for multiple objectives. Accounting for critical

change-points of target taxa can help to deliver this specificity, by defining a safe operating space to

manipulate carbon while avoiding biodiversity losses.


-----

## Introduction

Forests play a critical role in mitigating climate change, in addition to providing many ecosystem

services fundamental to human society (FAO, 2015; MEA, 2005). The estimated amount of carbon stored in

forests globally is almost 900 Pg (=10[15] g), with a net global carbon sink of 1.1 Pg C per year (Pan et al.,

2011). Forests also provide habitat for over half of all known terrestrial plant and animal species (MEA,

2005), albeit covering only 27% of the Earth’s land area (FAO, 2015). Conserving forests and managing them

sustainably is therefore fundamental for facing two of the most pressing societal challenges of our times:

biodiversity loss and climate change (MEA, 2005).

Global and regional environmental policies, such as the 2015 Paris Agreement, the REDD+

(Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation) initiative (Gardner et al., 2012) or the

European Forest Strategy (European Commission, 2013), all acknowledge the critical importance of forests

for jointly addressing biodiversity conservation and climate change mitigation (Bustamante et al., 2016;

Deere et al., 2018; Ferreira et al., 2018). The extent to which these two targets can be reached in parallel,

however, is not properly understood (Di Marco, Watson, Currie, Possingham, & Venter, 2018; Mori,

Lertzman, & Gustafsson, 2017; Pichancourt, Firn, Chadès, & Martin, 2014). If high biodiversity and carbon

stocks coincide spatially, then protecting carbon-dense forests or managing forests for high carbon stocks

would co-benefit both environmental policy goals (Di Marco et al., 2018; Reside, VanDerWal, & Moran,

2017; Strassburg et al., 2010). Otherwise, this may lead to negative biodiversity outcomes (Boysen, Lucht, &

Gerten, 2017; Bustamante et al., 2016; Ferreira et al., 2018). For instance, protecting a carbon-dense forest

may reallocate human pressure to unprotected areas with lower carbon density, but high biodiversity (Di

Marco et al., 2018). Also, shifting from natural vegetation to tree plantations to maximise carbon stock

leads to biodiversity loss (Pichancourt et al., 2014), especially where natural grasslands or savannahs are

afforested (Bremer & Farley, 2010; Burrascano et al., 2016; Pellegrini, Socolar, Elsen, & Giam, 2016). Finally,

it remains unclear at which scales co-benefits between conservation and climate-change-mitigation should

be sought. Should carbon storage and conservation goals be integrated at the stand scale, where

management takes place, or at broader scales, thus prioritizing one of the goals at the stand scale?


-----

Understand the relationship between carbon stocks and biodiversity, and how it varies across spatial scales,

is crucial to answer this question (Gardner et al., 2012; Mori et al., 2017; Reside et al., 2017).

At the scale of an individual forest stand, carbon stock is the amount of long-term carbon stored in

living biomass, dead organic matter and soil carbon pools, and is the result of the complex relationships

between forest productivity, disturbance history, and species composition (FAO, 2015). Compared to other

important forest carbon pools, above-ground live carbon stored in wood (hereafter above-ground live

carbon) can be quantified relatively easily, and is therefore considered a sustainable forest management

indicator (CBD, 2006; FOREST EUROPE, 2015). Even if it constitutes the substrate for many forest species

(Bouvet et al., 2016; Hatanaka, Wright, Loyn, & Mac Nally, 2011; Stokland, Siitonen, & Jonsson, 2012),

above-ground live carbon is only indirectly related to biodiversity (Hatanaka et al., 2011). Recent evidence

supports a positive correlation between above-ground live carbon and biodiversity at broader scales (Di

Marco et al., 2018; Strassburg et al., 2010). The shape of the carbon-biodiversity relationship remains

however an open question for the scales most relevant to decision-makers, such as landscape and stand

scales (Deere et al., 2018; Ferreira et al., 2018; Pichancourt et al., 2014). Large uncertainties also remain on

how this relationship varies across biogeographical regions (Di Marco et al., 2018; Potter & Woodall, 2014;

Xian et al., 2015). For the tropics, there is evidence for a positive relationship between biodiversity and

above-ground live carbon stocks, both across stands (Cavanaugh et al., 2014; Deere et al., 2018; Magnago

et al., 2015), and within stands (Sullivan et al., 2017), especially for disturbed sites (Ferreira et al., 2018). In

temperate forests, research has traditionally focused on carbon sequestration and productivity (Ratcliffe et

al., 2017), which are often not good indicators of carbon stock. Although recent work highlighted the

importance of carbon quality, or complexity, for bird biodiversity (Hatanaka et al., 2011), studies relating

carbon quantity to biodiversity remain rare and mostly refer to tree diversity only (Potter & Woodall, 2014;

Xian et al., 2015).

The carbon-biodiversity relationship may also vary across taxonomic groups (Di Marco et al., 2018;

Ferreira et al., 2018). Even in the tropics most research to date has focused on either vertebrates (Beaudrot

et al., 2016; Deere et al., 2018; Sollmann et al., 2017), or tree species richness only (Cavanaugh et al., 2014;


-----

Magnago et al., 2015; Sullivan et al., 2017), while research comparing the carbon-biodiversity relationship

across groups at fine-scale remains rare (Ferreira et al., 2018). Although understandable, given the inherent

costs of collecting field-based data for multiple taxonomic groups (Bustamante et al., 2016), focusing on

trees or vertebrates only assumes that these taxa are good surrogates for overall forest biodiversity, which

is questionable (Larrieu et al., 2018; Sabatini et al., 2016; Zilliox & Gosselin, 2014). Moreover, even within

the same taxonomic group, different species may relate very differently to carbon stocks (Edwards et al.,

2014; Lindenmayer, Fischer, & Cunningham, 2005; Villard & Jonsson, 2009). Some species may benefit from

increasing carbon stocks (hereinafter called ‘win-win species’), while others, hereafter ‘trade-off species’,

may be hindered by the environmental conditions associated to carbon-dense forests (Ferreira et al., 2018).

Splitting the community into win-win and trade-off species, and considering explicitly the behaviour of

species of conservation concern, could thus help to better predict the effect of changing carbon stock on

specific components of biodiversity (Magnago et al., 2015; Sollmann et al., 2017).

Finally, although the carbon-biodiversity relationship is often assumed to be linear (Beaudrot et al.,

2016; Deere et al., 2018; Sullivan et al., 2017), thresholds could exist along the carbon stock gradient,

meaning that a slight change in forest carbon stocks could cause disproportionate biodiversity loss (Evans

et al., 2017; Sasaki, Furukawa, Iwasaki, Seto, & Mori, 2015). Such thresholds have been identified for a

range of anthropogenic gradients (Li, Xu, Zheng, Taube, & Bai, 2017; Magnago et al., 2015; Sasaki et al.,

2015), including carbon stocks in tropical forests (Ferreira et al., 2018). For temperate forests, however,

empirical evidence is lacking (Evans et al., 2017), especially at fine scales (Sasaki et al., 2015). Identifying

such thresholds, and understanding how they vary across taxa and forest types, would provide important

information on how forest management, including timber harvesting, might impact biodiversity. This would

help to identify ‘safe operating spaces’ for manipulating forest carbon in managed forests without

triggering undesired biodiversity loss (Villard & Jonsson, 2009).

Here, we investigated the relationships between the diversity of six ecological groups (i.e.,

saproxylic beetles, birds, bryophytes, wood-inhabiting fungi, epiphytic lichens, and vascular plants) and


-----

carbon stock across 22 temperate forest sites in three European countries. We addressed the following

questions:

(1) What is the relationship between above-ground live carbon stocks and (a) species richness of different

taxa, and (b) a single, unified multidiversity index?

(2) How do responses to increasing above-ground live carbon of individual species, and the proportion of

win-win and trade-off species, vary across taxonomic groups and forest types?

(3) Are there community level thresholds in species richness or composition along carbon stock gradients?

## Methods

### Study sites

Our study area included a network of 352 plots in 22 temperate forest sites (ranging from 200 to 400

km[2]) covering a wide latitudinal and longitudinal range across Europe (Figure 1, Table S1). The sites covered

deciduous forest types that are common in temperate Europe, including acidophilous oak and oak-birch

forest (20 plots), mesophytic deciduous forest (84 plots), European beech (Fagus sylvatica) and montane

beech forest (232 plots in total), as well as thermophilous deciduos forest (16 plots). Forest type

nomenclature follows EEA (2006). Our dataset also covered a wide range of structural types (one-, two- and

multi-layered stands), ages, management histories, and management regimes, including coppice,

shelterwood, group selection and unmanaged stands. These stands comprised most of the forest

succession gradient, including late-successional phases.

Elevation ranged from 150 to 1700 m a.s.l. and substrates included sedimentary rocks (limestones,

dolomites, marls, and flysch) in the French and Italian sites, and alluvial gravel mixed with sand and loess in

the Hungarian site. All sites were within the temperate region: annual mean temperature varied from 5°C

in the French Alps to 14°C in southern Italy. Annual precipitation varied from about 600 mm to about 1900

mm.


-----

_Figure 1 – Distribution of forest sites in Europe. Pie charts return the relative proportion of plots in different forest types (FTs) for_

_each stand. FTs follow EEA (2006). The size of the pie represents the number of plots in each site. Grey shadings represent the_

_distribution of forest in Europe. FT4 - acidophilous oak and oak-birch forest; FT5 - mesophytic deciduous forest; FT6 - European_

_beech (Fagus sylvatica) and (FT7) montane beech forest; FT8 - thermophilous deciduos forest._

### Sampling and measuring biodiversity

Our multi-taxonomic dataset stemmed from projects (Burrascano et al., 2018) using similar, but not

identical sampling protocols (Table S2 in the Supplementary Material for details). All vascular plant species

were recorded in plots ranging from 314 to 1,256 m[2]. Bryophytes were sampled on different substrates

(standing trees, deadwood, rocks, and ground), while only epiphytic lichens and wood-inhabiting fungi

were considered. Birds were sampled through point-counts or area search techniques. Saproxylic beetles

were sampled using window-flight interception traps, emerging traps and Winkler extractors. Only

presence-absence data was available for birds, bryophytes, fungi and lichens, while abundance data was


-----

available for plants (percentage cover) and beetles (number of trapped individuals). Not all six taxonomic

groups were sampled in every plot, returning a total of 1,533 (= taxonomic group x plot) combinations. We

fixed nomenclature inconsistencies in the species lists based on up-to-date checklists (Table S2).

To control for varying sampling efforts across sites, we calculated for each plot the scaled richness of

each taxonomic group, i.e. the ratio between the richness observed in the plot (alpha diversity) and the

species pool size of that taxonomic group in a given site. Species pool size was estimated as the asymptotic

species richness based on sample-based rarefaction and extrapolation curves (Colwell et al., 2012) using

the Chao2 estimator in the R package iNext (Hsieh, Ma, & Chao, 2016). We then calculated the average

scaled richness across taxonomic groups to obtain a single measure of the diversity of all taxa we sampled,

hereafter referred to as multidiversity (Allan et al., 2014). Multidiversity ranges between 0 and 1, with

multidiversity of 1 meaning that a plot hosts all species contained in the species pool of a site.

Multidiversity has the advantage of being comparable across sites, whatever the sampling effort and the

species pool (both at the taxa and the site levels).

### Forest above-ground live carbon 

We sampled living trees in plots ranging from 491 and 2,827 m[2] in area using a diameter at breast

height (DBH) threshold of 10 cm. Height was measured for all the trees or in a sample of them and

calculated successively for the others by means of height-diameter models. Growing stock was calculated

using local allometric equations, with DBH and height as explanatory variables (Table S2) and then

converted to above-ground live carbon (AGC, MgC/ha) as AGC = GS*BEF*WBD/2, where BEFs are biomass

expansion factors and WBDs are the wood basic densities (Federici, Vitullo, Tulipano, De Lauretis, &

Seufert, 2008).

### Control variables

Coarse woody debris was sampled in plots ranging from 491 to 1,600 m[2] using a diameter threshold

of 10 cm. Volume of deadwood pieces were either calculated using the same allometric equations used for

living trees (for standing or downed dead trees), or approximating deadwood volume to truncated cones or

cylinders, depending on the data source (Table S2). We then calculated coarse woody debris ratio as the


-----

ratio between deadwood volume and total live and dead wood volumes. As additional control variables, we

derived two topographic covariates (slope, aspect) from a 30-m resolution Digital Terrain Model (NASA,

2006), which we then used to calculate heat load, i.e. the heat gain from incoming solar radiation.

Moreover, we derived two climatic variables (mean annual temperature and precipitation) from raster

layers with 30 arcsec resolution grids (approx. 13 km) from WorldClim v2.0 (Fick & Hijmans, 2017). We

derived information on parent material from the European Digital Archive on Soil Maps to classify plots into

three classes: igneous-metamorphic, sedimentary-clastic, sedimentary-limestone (Panagos, Jones, Bosco, &

Kumar, 2011). Finally, we considered forest type as a categorical variable with four levels: acidophilous oak,

mesophytic deciduous, beech dominated, and thermophilous deciduous.

### Modelling the response of biodiversity to forest above-ground C

We used Boosted Regression Trees (BRTs) to assess the relationship between above-ground live

carbon and the scaled species richness of each taxonomic group as well as multidiversity. BRTs are non
parametric models based on decision trees in a boosting framework that does not require prior

assumptions. BRTs are therefore relatively robust against overfitting, missing data, and collinearity (Elith,

Leathwick, & Hastie, 2008). We used above-ground live carbon as explanatory variable, while controlling for

the effect of forest structure, climatic, topographical and soil. After checking for correlation (Pearson’s

r>0.7), we retained five control variables: coarse woody debris ratio, forest type, annual precipitation, heat

load and substrate parent material. We also included forest site and data source as categorical control

variables to account for remaining unobserved environmental and methodological differences across sites.

We parametrized the BRTs setting a tree complexity of 5 and a bag fraction of 0.5 (Elith et al.,

2008). We tested different learning rates (0.5 - 0.0025), and determined the optimal number of trees for

each learning rate using the gbm.step routine provided in the dismo package (Hijmans, Phillips, Leathwick,

& Elith, 2011). We then selected the parameter combination returning the highest cross-validated model

fit. We finally calculated the relative importance of each explanatory variable (i.e., the fraction of times a


-----

variable was selected for splitting a tree in each BRT model, weighted by the squared model improvement).

We evaluated model performance using 10-fold cross-validation. We explored the relationship between

biodiversity and the explanatory variables using partial dependency plots, which are the graphical

visualizations of the marginal effect of a given explanatory variable on scaled richness (or multidiversity).

These plots also allow to visually check for non-linear responses and possible thresholds. We explored the

interactions between explanatory variables using the gbm.interactions function in the dismo package. All

analysis were performed in R 3.4.1.

### Assessment of win-win and trade-offs species

We used Threshold Indicator Taxa Analysis – TITAN (Baker & King, 2010) to identify win-win and

trade-off species, i.e. species that respectively increase or decrease their abundance and/or frequency with

increasing levels of above-ground live carbon. TITAN uses binary partitioning by indicator value (IndVal,

Dufrêne & Legendre, 1997) to identify species-specific change-points along an environmental gradient

(above-ground live carbon in our case). Change-points are compared to random data permutations to

assess their relevance, taking into account indices of purity (i.e. proportion of bootstrapped change-points

response that agree with the observed response) and reliability (i.e. proportion of bootstrapped change

points with significant IndVal for p<0.05). We evaluated uncertainty in change-point location based on the

bootstrapped empirical distribution (Baker & King, 2010). To account for the nested (plots within sites) and

unbalanced (different number of plots per site) nature of our dataset, we modified TITAN’s original

bootstrapping approach to randomly select (with replacement) a number of plots per site equal to the

number of plots in the site having the lowest number of plots (if greater than 3, 3 otherwise). We ran TITAN

after pooling all species across taxonomic groups, but separately for forest types. We aggregated

acidophilous and mesophytic oak forests (oak-dominated thereafter), and lowland and montane beech

forests (beech-dominated forest thereafter) but excluded termophilous oak forests due to the low sample

size (n = 16). We also checked the conservation status of our win-win or trade-off species using the IUCN

red lists (IUCN, 2017) and the r package rredlist (version 4.0, Chamberlain, 2017).


-----

TITAN also allows to explore if species-level change points aggregate to a community-level

threshold, i.e. congruent change-points across all individual species, which we did separately for trade-off

and win-win species. To explore the variability across taxonomic groups in community-level change-points,

we ran TITAN both when considering the whole species assemblage, and for each taxonomic groups. We

considered narrow confidence limits across bootstrapped replicates as an evidence for a community

threshold.

## Results

### Relationships between above-ground live carbon and species richness

The relationship between scaled richness and above-ground live carbon was overall consistently

weak (relative importance between 3.3-12.2%), and varied in direction across taxa (Figure 2). The scaled

richness of birds, bryophytes and fungi increased slightly, but non-linearly, across the above-ground live

carbon gradient (~5% absolute increase along the whole gradient). Most of the increase for birds and

bryophytes occurred between 180-200 MgC/ha and 120-150 MgC/ha, respectively. The richness fraction of

fungi increased non-monotonically along the above-ground live carbon gradient, with a first peak at 70

MgC/ha, and a secondary peak at 175 MgC/ha. The richness fraction of plants, instead, showed a ~5%

absolute decline (see also Figures S1-S6).


-----

_Figure 2 – Partial dependency plots of the relationship between scaled richness and above-ground live carbon, modelled using_

_Boosted Regression Trees. Scaled richness represents the fraction of species of the species pool size estimated for a given plot. Ticks_

_on the x-axis represent above-ground live carbon data distribution. For each taxonomic group, we report in parenthesis the relative_

_importance of above-ground live carbon in the respective boosted regression tree model._

Above-ground live carbon had a very little relative importance on multidiversity (3.3%), compared

to other control variables especially site (relative importance 77.2% - Figure S7). Multidiversity increased by

less than 1% over the whole above-ground live carbon gradient (Figure 3). BRT models were effective at

modelling multidiversity and scaled richness (cross-validation correlation 0.53-0.84, Table S3), although

most of the variation derived from site-to-site differences. Indeed, site was always the variable having the

highest relative importance (57.4-84%, Figure S1-S7). For all taxa but beetles and lichens, the interaction

between site and above-ground live carbon ranked among the top three most important interactions.


-----

_Figure 3 – Partial dependency plot of the relationship between multidiversity and above-ground live carbon using Boosted_

_Regression Trees. Tick marks on the x-axis represent above-ground live carbon data distribution._

### Response of individual species to changes in above ground carbon

The TITAN analyses identified 27 and 75 species as pure and reliable indicators of above-ground live

carbon (i.e. having a consistent response in both direction and magnitude across bootstrap replicates),

corresponding to 5.3% and 9.0% of the total number of species in oak- and beech-dominated forests,

respectively (Figure 4). Most of the species-specific change-points occurred between 80-120 MgC/ha, in

both forest types (Fig. S8-S9). Eleven species (ten plants and one bryophyte) were pure and reliable

indicators in both forest types. All pure and reliable trade-off indicator species for oak-dominated forests

were plants (Figure S8), either tree species with good dispersal ability (e.g., Sorbus _aria, S. domestica, Acer_

_campestre) or herbs and shrubs associated to forest margins (e.g., Vicia sepium, Lonicera_ _xylosteum, Rosa_

_arvensis). Win-win species were mostly bryophytes, typically found in shaded conditions and, secondarily,_

beetles (Tomicus piniperda, Cryptolestes duplicatus). Trade-off species in beech forests were principally

plants (22 species), beetles (16 species) and secondarily birds (three species) and fungi (one species, Figure

S9). Win-win species were mostly plants (14 species) and beetles (11 species). Those associated to the right

end of the above-ground C gradient were mostly fungi (Fuscoporia ferruginosa, Stereum rugosum and


-----

_Heterobasidion annosum) and beetles (e.g., Pediacus dermestoides, and Xylechinus pilosus). Only 200 out of_

the 2,384 species we considered were included in the IUCN database, with conservation status of win-win

and trade-off species only available for 18 species, none of which were threatened.

_Figure 4 – Proportion of win-win vs. trade-off species across taxonomic groups and forest types (sorted for decreasing number of_

_win-win species). a) oak-dominated forests. b) beech-dominated forests c) comparison of the two forest types across all taxonomic_

_groups. Win-Win* (trade-off*) species are pure and reliable species. Win-win (trade-off) species are pure but not reliable indicators._

We found a slightly higher number of trade-off than win-win species, both in oak (3.4 vs. 2%) and in

beech (4.7% vs. 4.3%, respectively - Figure 4c). When also considering species not having a reliable

response (i.e. responding consistently across bootstraps, but being significant indicators at the p<0.05 level

in less than 95% of bootstraps) this balanced picture did not change (8.7% trade-off vs 7.9% win-win species

in oak-dominated forests; 11.3% vs 10.8% in beech dominated forests).


-----

The contribution of individual taxonomic groups varied substantially across forest types. In oak
dominated forests (Figure 4a), fungi, lichens and bryophytes returned a higher proportion of win-win than

trade-off species, while for plants, we observed the opposite. In beech forests, most taxonomic groups had

a higher proportion of trade-off than win-win species, with the exception of bryophytes and beetles (Figure

4b).

### Community level change-points along above-ground live carbon gradients

Aggregating individual species’ responses to infer community-level change-points did not reveal a

clear community-level threshold in above-ground live carbon across all the taxa (Figure 5). In oak
dominated forests, the wide confidence intervals around the community-level change-points suggest that

rather than abruptly, trade-off species were gradually replaced by win-win species with increasing above
ground live carbon. In beech forests, instead, we observed relatively sharp community-level change-points

for trade-off species across all taxa (except lichens), which ranged between 81.3 MgC/ha (fungi) and 122.4

MgC/ha (lichens). In both forest types, community-level change-points of win-win species were more

variable than those of trade-off species and, at least in beech forests, returned wider confidence intervals

(e.g., for plants, fungi and beetles). Community-level change-points for trade-off species of different taxa

were very similar across the two forest types, while for win-win species these were on average higher in

beech compared to oak forests.


-----

_Figure 5 – Community-level change-points and 90% quantiles along the above-ground live carbon gradient for different taxonomic_

_groups, in two forest types. Tick marks on the x-axis represent above-ground live carbon data distribution._

## Discussion

Can managing forest for carbon storage jointly achieve biodiversity conservation and climate
change mitigation goals? Answering this question critically depends on better understanding the

relationship between forest carbon stocks and biodiversity for the scales at which management takes place

(Ferreira et al., 2018; Gardner et al., 2012; Mori et al., 2017). We assembled a large dataset of fine-scale

forest carbon stocks and multi-taxonomical diversity for temperate forest, where knowledge gaps are

largest. We found little evidence that above-ground live carbon and species richness in temperate forests

are congruent at the stand scale, which contrasts with most of the evidence from the tropics (Sullivan et al.,

2017). For all taxa we investigated, we found that win-win species gradually replaced trade-off species with

increasing above-ground live carbon levels, changes that aggregate biodiversity indices (e.g. richness)

would fail to detect. In general, species and community-level change-points were neither congruent, nor

equally abrupt across taxa, suggesting that leveraging co-benefits across taxonomic groups might be

difficult. Overall, our results highlight that in temperate forests it may not be best to jointly pursue

conservation and climate-change-mitigation goals at the stand scale. Rather, forest planners should


-----

establish local priorities to leverage potentially higher co-benefits at broader scales. Stand-scale priorities

can be established by taking into account the taxon-specific carbon-biodiversity relationship and the share

of win-win vs. trade-off species to establish a safe operating space to manipulate above-ground live carbon

levels while avoiding undesired biodiversity loss.

Our work provides new insights into the shape, variability and context-specificity of the carbon
biodiversity relationship, especially for taxonomic groups that are rarely considered (e.g., fungi, lichens,

saproxylic beetles and bryophytes). The correlation between carbon and biodiversity was overall relatively

weak and highly variable across taxonomic groups. While previous research mostly reported a positive

carbon-biodiversity relationship in tropical forest (Deere et al., 2018; Magnago et al., 2015; Sullivan et al.,

2017), for temperate forests the evidence is still inconclusive and mainly based on tree species only (Potter

& Woodall, 2014; Xian et al., 2015). The contrasting patterns observed across different taxonomic groups

may explain the weak relationship between multidiversity and above-ground live carbon. On the one hand,

carbon-dense, late-successional forests represent better habitat than open forests for many organisms.

Birds, for instance, may benefit from high above-ground live carbon, especially in the presence of

ecologically complex carbon, such as wide-branching canopies, large standing trees and stem cavities

(Bouvet et al., 2016; Hatanaka et al., 2011). High above-ground live carbon also often correlates with high

deadwood levels, which represents fundamental resources for wood-inhabiting fungi or beetles (Lassauce

et al., 2011; Stokland et al., 2012). On the other hand, plant richness decreased with increasing above
ground live carbon stocks, likely as a consequence of the strong, asymmetrical competition for light exerted

by few tree species on the herb-layer, which comprises the majority of plant species in temperate forests

(Sabatini, Jiménez-Alfaro, Burrascano, & Blasi, 2014). Furthermore, in our assessment most variation

occurred across forest sites, rather than along the above-ground live carbon gradient. This is in agreement

with previous research, which highlighted the importance of broad-scale drivers, including macroclimate

and the regional species pool, as determinants of forest fine-scale biodiversity (Jiménez-Alfaro et al., 2018;

Sullivan et al., 2017).


-----

Forest assemblage composition did change along the above-ground live carbon gradient, although

species richness and multidiversity did not. With increasing above-ground live carbon, win-win species

gradually replaced trade-off species, confirming that what constitutes suitable habitat conditions differs

among species (Lindenmayer et al., 2005). Both in oak- and beech-dominated forests, the overall

proportion of win-win species was similar to the proportion of trade-off species. This might concur at

explaining why both multidiversity and scaled richness per taxa were relatively insensitive to increasing

above-ground live carbon, since neither can discriminate between colonization and local extinction of

species when these occur simultaneously and gradually in response to shifts in ecological conditions

(Lindenmayer et al., 2005). As observed in tropical forests, the effect of carbon removal on species richness

may be confounded by the increase in generalist species, so that a special focus on sensitive species, or

species of conservation concern is recommended (Deere et al., 2018; Magnago et al., 2015). In our work,

the conservation status of the vast majority (92%) of species was not available, especially for understudied

taxa (i.e. lichens, fungi and bryophytes; IUCN, 2017). In the absence of species-level assessments,

identifying win-win and trade-off species, provides a proxy for identifying sensitive taxa, and for calibrating

biodiversity goals when managing temperate forests for climate-change mitigation.

Community-level change-points differed between win-win and trade-off species, as well as across

taxa and forest types, suggesting that a clear ecological threshold along the carbon-stock gradient may not

exist in temperate forests. When considering trade-off species, however, we found a relatively marked

decrease between ~80-120 MgC/ha, and the change-points of different taxonomic groups were surprisingly

similar across the two forest types. We interpret this result as the effect of canopy closure (i.e. the phase of

forest succession when the canopies of individual trees overlap), which reduces light availability, buffers

temperature variation, increases relative humidity, and nearly excludes wind at the forest floor (Franklin et

al., 2002). These ecological changes may determine a shift in the species composition of the herb-layer and

facilitate forest succession towards the dominance of shade tolerant species, while triggering bottom-up

cascading effects on the whole trophic network (Kagata & Ohgushi, 2006). Furthermore, canopy closure

kicks off self-thinning processes, which provide a first pulse of deadwood in early successional stands, thus


-----

favouring the colonization by saproxylic species (Lassauce et al., 2011; Stokland et al., 2012). This result

suggests that a general pattern may exist in temperate forests and advises against assuming a linear

positive carbon-biodiversity relationship in conservation actions (Di Marco et al. 2018).

We used a large, multi-taxonomic dataset collected across a broad geographical area and

environmental gradient, which give us confidence on the generality of our result. Still, our analyses do not

come without uncertainty. First, although comprehensive, our dataset suffers from a lack of detailed

information on management and disturbance history, both of which influence biodiversity and carbon

stock, and possibly their relationship (Paillet et al., 2010). Second, our results provide indication on the

carbon-biodiversity relationship exclusively for natural or semi-natural forests, i.e. self-regenerated forests

of native species. These forests are particularly relevant for biodiversity conservation, but in many

European countries they are often replaced with forest plantations composed of very productive carbon
sinking species (e.g., Picea abies, _Pseudotsuga menziesii, Eucalyptus spp.) that may show different carbon-_

biodiversity relationships (Pichancourt et al., 2014). Finally, our dataset is spatially nested in nature. Failing

to treat data nestedness leads to the classical problem of pseudoreplication and increases the probability of

type I error. To avoid this problem, we accounted for nestedness by stratifying the bootstrapping

procedure when exploring change-points through TITAN. This approach, however, strongly reduces the

power of the analysis, which means that our analysis probably detected only a conservative subset of the

win-win and trade-off species.

Our work provides new understanding of how co-benefits between biodiversity and carbon storage

might be leveraged in temperate forests. Three major implications for management derive from our

results. First, biodiversity and above-ground live carbon cannot easily be simultaneously maximized in

temperate forests at the scale of individual stands. Instead of seeking to integrate both goals at the stand

scale (i.e., a land sharing strategy), co-benefits might be larger for strategies that seek to maximize co
benefits at broader scales by prioritizing either biodiversity conservation or carbon-storage goals at the

stand scale (i.e., a land sparing strategy; Butsic & Kuemmerle, 2015; Edwards et al., 2014). Forest planners

and managers should carefully evaluate whether to give priority to biodiversity conservation or other


-----

carbon-related goals, since maximizing forest carbon at the stand scale may only benefit some species,

while harming others. Importantly, the scaling of trade-offs in temperate forests thus appears to differ

fundamentally from tropical forests, at least those under management, where climate and biodiversity

objectives may be effectively be integrated at the stand scale (Deere et al., 2018; Magnago et al., 2015;

Ferreira et al, 2018).

Second, reconciling biodiversity and carbon objectives requires planning across scales. This includes

assessments of which arrangement of management types delivers lowest trade-off or highest co-benefits

(Law et al., 2017; Reside et al., 2017), while integrating stand-scale constraints (Pichancourt et al., 2014).

Likewise, landscape-scale planning is needed to ensure heterogeneity in forest developmental stage and

structure across stands (Schall et al., 2018), which should include set-asides (Bouget et al., 2014; Ferreira et

al., 2018; Hatanaka et al., 2011), to ensure that trade-off assessments are robust over time. Encouraging

the retention of blocks of undisturbed forest as a conservation priority within managed forests may

represent an effective option for reconciling carbon-storage and conservation goals, while incorporating

multiple environmental goals in forest management (Edwards et al., 2014). This would allow for the

persistence of the full range of both win-win and trade-off species, and therefore maximizing multi
taxonomic diversity while optimizing carbon-stock allocation (Trentanovi, Campagnaro, Rizzi, & Sitzia,

2018). Third, rather than relying on synthetic indices of biodiversity, only an explicit consideration of all

taxa of conservation concern will provide the full picture of how these taxa respond to the manipulation of

forest structure and above-ground live carbon stocks in temperate forests (Villard & Jonsson, 2009).

## Acknowledgments:

F.M.S. was funded by the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme

under the Marie _Skłodowska-Curie, grant agreement No. 658876. Sapienza University of Rome provided the_

funding for the networking activities that allowed this joint research (Ricerche Universitarie 2015 - prot.

C26A15KE2T). Data collected in central and southern Italy derive from the LIFE+ project FAGUS

(11/NAT/IT/00135), those relative to Hungary from Hungarian Research Fund (OTKA K79158), Őrség


-----

National Park Directorate; for the French Alps funding came from IRSTEA and from the Conseil Général de

l’Isère and Bauges Natural Regional Park; data for the rest of France were collected by funding of the

French Ministry in charge of Ecology (Convention Cemagref-DEB (MEEDDAT), Action GNB and the program

“Biodiversité, Gestion Forestière et Politiques Publiques” (BGF), convention GNB 10-MBGD-BGF-1-CVS-092,

no CHORUS 2100 214 651) and the Office National des Forêts (Convention ONF-Cemagref, Action 5, 2008);

data for northern Italy was collected with funding provided by the Italian Ministry of Agricultural, Food and

Forestry Policies, State Forestry Corps (Project Managers: A. Andrighetti and D. Campedel), research

agreement No. 767/ 2008 (TS, Principal Investigator). Above all we wish to thank all the people that

collaborated in the fieldwork and in the species identification and that solved nomenclature issues: G.

Antonini, M.M. Azzella, H. Brustel, M. Cassol, O. Courtin, M. Dal Cortivo, J. Delnatte, L. Facioni, G. Favier, E.

Gatti, G. Gobbo, J. Haran, I. Király, G. Kutszegi, S. Labonne, F. Lakatos, E. Lattanzi, F. Lebagousse, D.

Lunghini, Z. Mag, O. Maggi, S. Márialigeti, C. Moliard, B. Németh, T. Noblecourt, B. Nusillard, F. Padovan, F.

Parisi, S. Ravera, O. Rose, I. Siller, M. Sommacal, P. Tardif, A. Tilia, F. Tinya, M.Varaschin.

## References

Allan, E., Bossdorf, O., Dormann, C. F., Prati, D., Gossner, M. M., Tscharntke, T., . . . Boch, S. (2014).
Interannual variation in land-use intensity enhances grassland multidiversity. Proceedings of the
_National Academy of Sciences, 111(1), 308-313._
Baker, M. E., & King, R. S. (2010). A new method for detecting and interpreting biodiversity and ecological
community thresholds. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 1(1), 25-37.
Beaudrot, L., Kroetz, K., Alvarez‐Loayza, P., Amaral, I., Breuer, T., Fletcher, C., . . . Marshall, A. R. (2016).
Limited carbon and biodiversity co‐benefits for tropical forest mammals and birds. Ecological
_Applications, 26(4), 1098-1111._
Bouget, C., Parmain, G., Gilg, O., Noblecourt, T., Nusillard, B., Paillet, Y., . . . Gosselin, F. (2014). Does a set‐
aside conservation strategy help the restoration of old‐growth forest attributes and
recolonization by saproxylic beetles? Animal Conservation, 17(4), 342-353.
Bouvet, A., Paillet, Y., Archaux, F., Tillon, L., Denis, P., Gilg, O., & Gosselin, F. (2016). Effects of forest
structure, management and landscape on bird and bat communities. Environmental Conservation,
_43(2), 148-160._
Boysen, L. R., Lucht, W., & Gerten, D. (2017). Trade‐offs for food production, nature conservation and
climate limit the terrestrial carbon dioxide removal potential. Global Change Biology, 23(10), 43034317.
Bremer, L. L., & Farley, K. A. (2010). Does plantation forestry restore biodiversity or create green deserts? A
synthesis of the effects of land-use transitions on plant species richness. Biodiversity and
_Conservation, 19(14), 3893-3915._
Burrascano, S., Chytrý, M., Kuemmerle, T., Giarrizzo, E., Luyssaert, S., Sabatini, F. M., & Blasi, C. (2016).
Current European policies are unlikely to jointly foster carbon sequestration and protect


-----

biodiversity. Biological Conservation, 201, 370-376.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2016.08.005
Burrascano, S., De Andrade, R. B., Paillet, Y., Ódor, P., Antonini, G., Bouget, C., . . . Blasi, C. (2018).
Congruence across taxa and spatial scales: Are we asking too much of species data? Global Ecology
_and Biogeography. doi:10.1111/geb.12766_
Bustamante, M. M., Roitman, I., Aide, T. M., Alencar, A., Anderson, L. O., Aragão, L., . . . Chambers, J. (2016).
Toward an integrated monitoring framework to assess the effects of tropical forest degradation
and recovery on carbon stocks and biodiversity. Global Change Biology, 22(1), 92-109.
Butsic, V., & Kuemmerle, T. (2015). Using optimization methods to align food production and biodiversity
conservation beyond land sharing and land sparing. Ecological Applications, 25(3), 589-595.
Cavanaugh, K. C., Gosnell, J. S., Davis, S. L., Ahumada, J., Boundja, P., Clark, D. B., . . . Andelman, S. (2014).
Carbon storage in tropical forests correlates with taxonomic diversity and functional dominance on
a global scale. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 23(5), 563-573. doi:10.1111/geb.12143
CBD (2006). Framework for monitoring implementation of the achievement of the 2010 target and
_integration of targets into the thematic programmes of work: (Decision VIII/15, COP 8, 2006);_
available at www.cbd.int/decisions/.
Chamberlain, S. (2017). rredlist: 'IUCN' Red List Client. R package version 0.4.0. https://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=rredlist.
Colwell, R. K., Chao, A., Gotelli, N. J., Lin, S.-Y., Mao, C. X., Chazdon, R. L., & Longino, J. T. (2012). Models and
estimators linking individual-based and sample-based rarefaction, extrapolation and comparison of
assemblages. Journal of plant ecology, 5(1), 3-21.
Deere, N. J., Guillera‐Arroita, G., Baking, E. L., Bernard, H., Pfeifer, M., Reynolds, G., . . . Struebig, M. J.
(2018). High Carbon Stock forests provide co‐benefits for tropical biodiversity. Journal of Applied
_Ecology, 55(2), 997-1008._
Di Marco, M., Watson, J. E., Currie, D. J., Possingham, H. P., & Venter, O. (2018). The extent and
predictability of the biodiversity–carbon correlation. Ecology Letters.
Dufrêne, M., & Legendre, P. (1997). Species assemblages and indicator species: the need for a flexible
asymmetrical approach. Ecological Monographs, 61, 345-366.
Edwards, D. P., Gilroy, J. J., Woodcock, P., Edwards, F. A., Larsen, T. H., Andrews, D. J. R., . . . Wilcove, D. S.
(2014). Land-sharing versus land-sparing logging: reconciling timber extraction with biodiversity
conservation. Global Change Biology, 20(1), 183-191. doi:doi:10.1111/gcb.12353
EEA (2006). European forest types. Categories and types for sustainable forest management reporting and
_policy. Copenhagen, Denmark. Retrieved from:_
https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/technical_report_2006_9
Elith, J., Leathwick, J. R., & Hastie, T. (2008). A working guide to boosted regression trees. Journal of Animal
_Ecology, 77(4), 802-813._
European Commission. (2013). A new EU Forest Strategy: for forests and the forest-based sector. Brussels:
European Commission, COM(2013) 659 Final.
Evans, P. M., Newton, A. C., Cantarello, E., Martin, P., Sanderson, N., Jones, D. L., . . . Fuller, L. (2017).
Thresholds of biodiversity and ecosystem function in a forest ecosystem undergoing dieback.
_Scientific Reports, 7(1), 6775. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-06082-6_
FAO. (2015). Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015. Desk reference. Rome, Italy.
Federici, S., Vitullo, M., Tulipano, S., De Lauretis, R., & Seufert, G. (2008). An approach to estimate carbon
stocks change in forest carbon pools under the UNFCCC: the Italian case. Iforest-Biogeosciences and
_Forestry, 1(2), 86-95._
Ferreira, J., Lennox, G. D., Gardner, T. A., Thomson, J. R., Berenguer, E., Lees, A. C., . . . Barlow, J. (2018).
Carbon-focused conservation may fail to protect the most biodiverse tropical forests. Nature
_Climate Change. doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0225-7_
Fick, S. E., & Hijmans, R. J. (2017). WorldClim 2: new 1‐km spatial resolution climate surfaces for global
land areas. International Journal of Climatology.
FOREST EUROPE (2015). State of Europe’s Forests 2015. Madrid, Spain. Retrieved from:
https://www.foresteurope.org/docs/fullsoef2015.pdf


-----

Franklin, J. F., Spies, T. A., Van Pelt, R., Carey, A. B., Thornburgh, D. A., Berg, D. R., . . . Chen, J. Q. (2002).
Disturbances and structural development of natural forest ecosystems with silvicultural
implications, using Douglas-Fir forests as an example. Forest Ecology and Management, 155(1-3),
399-423.
Gardner, T. A., Burgess, N. D., Aguilar-Amuchastegui, N., Barlow, J., Berenguer, E., Clements, T., . . . Vieira, I.
C. G. (2012). A framework for integrating biodiversity concerns into national REDD+ programmes.
_Biological Conservation, 154, 61-71. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2011.11.018_
Hatanaka, N., Wright, W., Loyn, R. H., & Mac Nally, R. (2011). 'Ecologically complex carbon' - linking
biodiversity values, carbon storage and habitat structure in some austral temperate forests. Global
_Ecology and Biogeography, 20(2), 260-271. doi:10.1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00591.x_
Hijmans, R. J., Phillips, S., Leathwick, J., & Elith, J. (2011). Package ‘dismo’. Available online at: http://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/dismo/index.html.
Hsieh, T., Ma, K., & Chao, A. (2016). iNEXT: an R package for rarefaction and extrapolation of species
diversity (Hill numbers). Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7(12), 1451-1456.
IUCN (2017). The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2017-3. <http://www.iucnredlist.org>.
Downloaded on 05 December 2017.
Jiménez-Alfaro, B., Girardello, M., Chytrý, M., Svenning, J.-C., Willner, W., Gégout, J.-C., . . . Wohlgemuth, T.
(2018). History and environment shape species pools and community diversity in European beech
forests. Nature Ecology & Evolution, 2(3), 483-490. doi:10.1038/s41559-017-0462-6
Kagata, H., & Ohgushi, T. (2006). Bottom-up trophic cascades and material transfer in terrestrial food webs.
_Ecological Research, 21(1), 26-34._
Larrieu, L., Gosselin, F., Archaux, F., Chevalier, R., Corriol, G., Dauffy-Richard, E., . . . Savoie, J.-M. (2018).
Cost-efficiency of cross-taxon surrogates in temperate forests. Ecological Indicators, 87, 56-65.
Lassauce, A., Paillet, Y., Jactel, H., & Bouget, C. (2011). Deadwood as a surrogate for forest biodiversity:
Meta-analysis of correlations between deadwood volume and species richness of saproxylic
organisms. Ecological Indicators, 11(5), 1027-1039. doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2011.02.004
Law, E. A., Bryan, B. A., Meijaard, E., Mallawaarachchi, T., Struebig, M. J., Watts, M. E., & Wilson, K. A.
(2017). Mixed policies give more options in multifunctional tropical forest landscapes. Journal of
_Applied Ecology, 54(1), 51-60._
Li, W., Xu, F., Zheng, S., Taube, F., & Bai, Y. (2017). Patterns and thresholds of grazing‐induced changes in
community structure and ecosystem functioning: species‐level responses and the critical role of
species traits. Journal of Applied Ecology, 54(3), 963-975.
Lindenmayer, D. B., Fischer, J., & Cunningham, R. B. (2005). Native vegetation cover thresholds associated
with species responses. Biological Conservation, 124(3), 311-316.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2005.01.038
Magnago, L. F. S., Magrach, A., Laurance, W. F., Martins, S. V., Meira‐Neto, J. A. A., Simonelli, M., &
Edwards, D. P. (2015). Would protecting tropical forest fragments provide carbon and biodiversity
cobenefits under REDD+? Global Change Biology, 21(9), 3455-3468.
MEA (2005). Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Synthesis.
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Mori, A. S., Lertzman, K. P., & Gustafsson, L. (2017). Biodiversity and ecosystem services in forest
ecosystems: a research agenda for applied forest ecology. Journal of Applied Ecology, 54(1), 12-27.
doi:10.1111/1365-2664.12669
NASA (2006). Shuttle Radar Topography Mission. <http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm> (accessed 01.09.16).
Paillet, Y., Berges, L., Hjalten, J., Odor, P., Avon, C., Bernhardt-Romermann, M., . . . Virtanen, R. (2010).
Biodiversity Differences between Managed and Unmanaged Forests: Meta-Analysis of Species
Richness in Europe. Conservation Biology, 24(1), 101-112.
Pan, Y. D., Birdsey, R. A., Fang, J. Y., Houghton, R., Kauppi, P. E., Kurz, W. A., . . . Hayes, D. (2011). A Large
and Persistent Carbon Sink in the World's Forests. Science, 333(6045), 988-993.
doi:10.1126/science.1201609


-----

Panagos, P., Jones, A., Bosco, C., & Kumar, P. S. (2011). European digital archive on soil maps (EuDASM):
preserving important soil data for public free access. International Journal of Digital Earth, 4(5),
434-443.
Pellegrini, A. F. A., Socolar, J. B., Elsen, P. R., & Giam, X. (2016). Trade‐offs between savanna woody plant
diversity and carbon storage in the Brazilian Cerrado. Global Change Biology, 22(10), 3373-3382.
doi:doi:10.1111/gcb.13259
Pichancourt, J. B., Firn, J., Chadès, I., & Martin, T. G. (2014). Growing biodiverse carbon-rich forests. Global
_Change Biology, 20(2), 382-393. doi:10.1111/gcb.12345_
Potter, K. M., & Woodall, C. W. (2014). Does biodiversity make a difference? Relationships between species
richness, evolutionary diversity, and aboveground live tree biomass across U.S. forests. Forest
_Ecology and Management, 321, 117-129. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2013.06.026_
Ratcliffe, S., Wirth, C., Jucker, T., der Plas, F., Scherer‐Lorenzen, M., Verheyen, K., . . . Ohse, B. (2017).
Biodiversity and ecosystem functioning relations in European forests depend on environmental
context. Ecology Letters.
Reside, A. E., VanDerWal, J., & Moran, C. (2017). Trade-offs in carbon storage and biodiversity conservation
under climate change reveal risk to endemic species. Biological Conservation, 207, 9-16.
Sabatini, F. M., Burrascano, S., Azzella, M. M., Barbati, A., De Paulis, S., Di Santo, D., . . . Blasi, C. (2016). One
taxon does not fit all: Herb-layer diversity and stand structural complexity are weak predictors of
biodiversity in Fagus sylvatica forests. Ecological Indicators, 69, 126-137.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.04.012
Sabatini, F. M., Jiménez-Alfaro, B., Burrascano, S., & Blasi, C. (2014). Drivers of herb-layer species diversity
in two unmanaged temperate forests in northern Spain. Community Ecology, 15(2), 147-157.
doi:10.1556/ComEc.15.2014.2.3
Sasaki, T., Furukawa, T., Iwasaki, Y., Seto, M., & Mori, A. S. (2015). Perspectives for ecosystem management
based on ecosystem resilience and ecological thresholds against multiple and stochastic
disturbances. Ecological Indicators, 57, 395-408.
Schall, P., Gossner, M. M., Heinrichs, S., Fischer, M., Boch, S., Prati, D., . . . Böhm, S. (2018). The impact of
even‐aged and uneven‐aged forest management on regional biodiversity of multiple taxa in
European beech forests. Journal of Applied Ecology.
Sollmann, R., Mohamed, A., Niedballa, J., Bender, J., Ambu, L., Lagan, P., . . . Gardner, B. (2017). Quantifying
mammal biodiversity co‐benefits in certified tropical forests. Diversity and Distributions, 23(3),
317-328.
Stokland, J. N., Siitonen, J., & Jonsson, B. G. (2012). Biodiversity in dead wood: Cambridge University Press.
Strassburg, B. B. N., Kelly, A., Balmford, A., Davies, R. G., Gibbs, H. K., Lovett, A., . . . Rodrigues, A. S. L.
(2010). Global congruence of carbon storage and biodiversity in terrestrial ecosystems.
_Conservation Letters, 3(2), 98-105. doi:10.1111/j.1755-263X.2009.00092.x_
Sullivan, M. J. P., Talbot, J., Lewis, S. L., Phillips, O. L., Qie, L., Begne, S. K., . . . Zemagho, L. (2017). Diversity
and carbon storage across the tropical forest biome. Scientific Reports, 7, 39102.
doi:10.1038/srep39102
Trentanovi, G., Campagnaro, T., Rizzi, A., & Sitzia, T. (2017). Synergies of planning for forests and planning
for Natura 2000: Evidences and prospects from northern Italy. Journal for Nature Conservation, 43,
239-249. doi:10.1016/j.jnc.2017.07.006
Villard, M.-A., & Jonsson, B. G. (2009). Tolerance of focal species to forest management intensity as a guide
in the development of conservation targets. Forest Ecology and Management, 258, S142-S145.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2009.08.034
Xian, W., Xiangping, W., Zhiyao, T., Zehao, S., Chengyang, Z., Xinli, X., & Jingyun, F. (2015). The relationship
between species richness and biomass changes from boreal to subtropical forests in China.
_Ecography, 38(6), 602-613. doi:doi:10.1111/ecog.00940_
Zilliox, C., & Gosselin, F. (2014). Tree species diversity and abundance as indicators of understory diversity
in French mountain forests: variations of the relationship in geographical and ecological space.
_Forest Ecology and Management, 321, 105-116._


-----

## Supplementary material

Table S1 – Description of study sites.

Table S2 – Main characteristics of the sampling protocols across different datasets.

Table S3 – Diagnostics of boosted regression tree models modelling multidiversity and the scaled richness

of different taxonomic groups.

Figure S1 – Partial dependency plots of the relationship between the scaled richness of beetles and the six

top-performing explanatory variables as modelled through a Boosted Regression Tree.

Figure S2 – Partial dependency plots for birds.

Figure S3 – Partial dependency plots for bryophytes.

Figure S4 - Partial dependency plots for fungi.

Figure S5 - Partial dependency plots for lichens.

Figure S6 - Partial dependency plots for plants.

Figure S7 – Partial dependency plots for multidiversity.

Figure S8 – Diving board plot of species-specific change-points for pure and reliable indicator species in oak
dominated forests.

Figure S9 – Diving board plot of species-specific change-points for pure and reliable indicator species in

beech forests.


-----

_Table S1 – Description of study sites._

**Stand Name** **Substrate** **Number**

**of Plots**


**Annual**
**Mean T**
**°C**


**Annual**
**rainfall mm**


**Elevation**

**m a.s.l.**


**Aspect**

**°**


**Slope**

**°**


**Latitude Longitude**


Ventron Limestone 22 9.0 800-900 455 229 5 47.818 6.798

Auberive Limestone 14 6.9 1300-1400 1043 189 16 47.583 3.649
Ballons- 9 10.9 650-750 195 222 4 46.235 12.237
Comtois Granit

Bois du Parc Limestone 9 7.2 1300-1500 1255 141 11 46.146 -0.386
Cajada forest - 18 12.0 800-900 89 207 2 47.090 5.050
Dolomiti
Bellunesi Dolomite/
National Park Limestone

Chizé Limestone 10 10.9 700-800 231 205 2 47.226 4.939


8 9.1 800-900 572 197 12 48.421 2.660


Citeaux


Alluvial
deposits


Combe Lavaux Limestone 25 10.5 600-700 138 172 3 45.145 5.506

Fontainebleau Acidic sands 18 7.0 1200-1500 1232 189 15 45.339 5.791

Vercors Limestone 31 6.8 1300-1900 1136 245 19 45.701 6.167

Chartreuse Limestone 29 7.2 1350-1850 1107 266 22 46.299 5.986

Bauges Limestone 6 7.5 1300-1400 1101 109 25 48.104 4.188
Haute-Chaine 12 10.0 650-750 175 170 2 46.892 16.308
du Jura Limestone


25 9.2 700-800 308 134 5 40.465 15.339


Haut Tuileau


Alluvial
deposits


Orseg gravel/loess 24 10.1 718-1250 1272 177 17 40.257 15.344

Cilento N Limestone 12 11.2 700 1246 175 17 42.508 13.514


19 9.1 1062-1097 1354 263 17 44.123 5.820


Cilento S


Limestone/
Flysch


Gran Sasso Limestone 7 8.0 1000-1100 1448 109 31 48.671 1.763

Lure Limestone 16 10.0 600-700 164 180 2 46.309 12.302

Rambouillet Acidic sands 11 7.2 1300-1500 1236 306 19 47.939 6.931
Val Tovanella Dolomite/ 3 8.9 1200-1300 956 266 22 48.757 2.250
Nature Reserve Limestone


7 9.6 600-700 177 203 2 44.181 5.261


Verrières


Acidic sands
marls


Ventoux Limestone 9 7.9 1000-1100 1356 187 25 47.818 6.798


-----

_Table S2 - Main characteristics of the sampling protocols across different datasets._

**Dataset IT_Cilento** **IT_FAGUS** **IT_NE** **HU** **FR_YP** **FR_Alps**
**Country** Italy Italy Italy Hungary France France
**Responsible** SB SB TS PÓ YP PJ
**Taxon** **Detail**
**Plants** Sampling unit size 1256 m[2] circular plot 1256 m[2] circular plot 490 m[2] circular plot 900 m[2] square plot 1000 m² circular plot 314 m[2] circular plot
shape

Season/year Summer 2007 Summer 2013 Summer 2007 Summer 2006 Spring-summer Spring-Summer
2008-2013 2014
Reference Burrascano et al. Sabatini et al. (2016) Sitzia et al. (2012) Márialigeti et al. Janssen et al. (2017)
(2011) (2016)

**Bryophytes** Sampling unit size four 154 m[2] circular 900 m[2] square plot 1256m² circular plot
shape plots

Substrates wood, ground wood, ground wood, ground
Season/year Summer 2008 Summer 2006-2009 Spring and Autumn
2008-2013
Reference Blasi et al. (2010); Király et al. (2013);
Brunialti et al. (2010) Márialigeti et al.

(2009); Ódor et al.
(2013)
**Lichens** Sampling unit size three 154 m[2] circular 1256 m[2] circular plot 490 m[2] circular plot 900 m[2] square plot 1256 m² square plot
shape plots

Substrates 3 trees (DBH > 16cm) 3 trees (DBH > 16cm) all trees all trees (DBH > 20cm) 6 largest trees
in each subplot in each subplot

Season/year Summer 2008 Summer 2013 Summer 2007 Summer 2010 Summer 2015
Reference Blasi et al. (2010); Sabatini et al. (2016) Nascimbene et al. Király et al. (2013);
Brunialti et al. (2010) (2013); Sitzia et al. Ódor et al. (2013)
(2017)

**Birds** Sampling unit size 1256 m[2] circular plot 1256 m[2] circular plot 490 m[2] circular plot 31,400 m[2 ]circular plot 31,400 m[2] circular
shape plot

Season/year Summer 2008 Summer 2013 Summer 2010-2011 Spring-Summer 2006 Spring-summer
2008-2013
Methodology 20-min pointcount 10-min pointcount 10-min pointcount pointcount 5-min pointcount
Frequency of 15 days once twice a year twice a year twice a year
sampling:


-----

Reference Blasi et al. (2010) Sabatini et al. (2016) Sitzia et al. (2017) Mag & Ódor (2015) Bouvet et al. (2016)
**Beetles** Sampling unit size 1256 m[2] circular plot 1256 m[2] circular plot 490 m[2] circular plot 900 m[2] square plot 1256m² circular plot 1256m² square plot
shape

Season/year Spring and Summer Summer 2013 Spring-Summer- Spring-Summer 2010 Spring-Summer Spring-Summer
2008 Autumn 2009 2008 2014
Methodology windowflight traps window flight traps, windowflight traps emerging traps windowflight traps windowflight traps,
emerging traps Winkler extractors
Frequency of monthly monthly twice a month only once monthly (for 3 monthly
sampling months)


Reference Blasi et al. (2010); Sabatini et al. (2016) Sitzia et al. (2015;
Persiani et al. (2010) 2017)


Bouget et al. (2016) Janssen et al. (2016)


**Fungi** Sampling unit size four 154 m[2] circular 530 m[2] circular plot 490 m[2] circular plot 900 m[2] square plot 1256m² circular plot
shape plots

Substrates wood > 10 cm wood > 10 cm wood wood > 10 cm wood
diameter diameter diameter

Season/year Summer 2008 Autumn 2013 Summer-Autumn Spring-Autumn 2010- Spring-Autumn
2009-2010 Summer 2009 2008-2013
Reference Blasi et al. (2010); Sabatini et al. (2016) Sitzia et al. (2017) Kutszegi et al. (2015)
Persiani et al. (2010)

**Forest** Plot size for living concentric circular concentric circular 491 m[2] 40 x 40 m plot Combined fixed 10-m-radius subplot
**structure** trees (DBH>10 cm) areas with a radius of areas with a radius of surface (314 m[2]) and for DBH > 10 cm; 2013 and 20 m 13 and 20 m fixed angle (2%) m-radius subplot for

DBH > 30 cm;
Plot size for Circular areas with a Circular areas with a logs: 491 m[2]; 40 x 40 m plot Combined line 10-m-radius subplot
deadwood (mid radius of 13 m radius of 13 m stumps/snags 736 intersect sampling (3 for DBH > 10 cm; 20diameter >10 cm m[2] X 10m) and fixed m-radius subplot for

surface (1256 m[2]) DBH > 30 cm;

Trees with height 20 height samples per 20 height samples per All All 5 largest trees No height
measurement main species per plot main species per plot (Dominant height) measurement taken


Allometric Tabacchi et al. (2011) Tabacchi et al. (2011) Castellani et al. Sopp & Kolozs (2000) Paillet et al. (2015) In mountain forests,
equations (1984) ALGAN table:
softwood=11;
hardwood=8


-----

**_Additional references cited in Table S2:_**

Blasi C, Marchetti M, Chiavetta U et al. (2010) Multi-taxon and forest structure sampling for

identification of indicators and monitoring of old-growth forest. Plant Biosystems, **144, 160-170.**

Bouvet A, Paillet Y, Archaux F, Tillon L, Denis P, Gilg O, Gosselin F (2016) Effects of forest structure,

management and landscape on bird and bat communities. Environmental Conservation, **43, 148-**

160.

Brunialti G, Frati L, Aleffi M, Marignani M, Rosati L, Burrascano S, Ravera S (2010) Lichens and

bryophytes as indicators of old-growth features in Mediterranean forests. Plant Biosystems, **144,**

221-233.

Burrascano S, Sabatini FM, Blasi C (2011) Testing indicators of sustainable forest management on

understorey composition and diversity in southern Italy through variation partitioning. Plant

Ecology, **212, 829-841.**

Castellani C, Scrinzi G, Tabacchi G, Tosi V (1984) Inventario Forestale Nazionale Italiano (IFNI) Tavole

di cubatura a doppia entrata. Istituto Sperimentale per l’Assestamento Forestale e per

l’Alpicoltura, Trento.

Janssen, P., S. Bec, M. Fuhr, P. Taberlet, J. J. Brun, and C. Bouget. 2018. Present conditions may

mediate the legacy effect of past land-use changes on species richness and composition of above
and below-ground assemblages. Journal of Ecology 106:306-318.

Janssen, P., E. Cateau, M. Fuhr, B. Nusillard, H. Brustel, and C. Bouget. 2016. Are biodiversity patterns

of saproxylic beetles shaped by habitat limitation or dispersal limitation? A case study in

unfragmented montane forests. Biodiversity and Conservation 25:1167-1185.

Kiraly I, Nascimbene J, Tinya F, Odor P (2013) Factors influencing epiphytic bryophyte and lichen

species richness at different spatial scales in managed temperate forests. Biodiversity and

Conservation, **22, 209-223.**

Kutszegi G, Siller I, Dima B et al. (2015) Drivers of macrofungal species composition in temperate

forests, West Hungary: functional groups compared. Fungal Ecology, **17, 69-83.**

Mag Z, Ódor P (2015) The effect of stand-level habitat characteristics on breeding bird assemblages

in Hungarian temperate mixed forests. Community Ecology, **16, 156-166.**

Márialigeti S, Németh B, Tinya F, Ódor P (2009) The effects of stand structure on ground-floor

bryophyte assemblages in temperate mixed forests. Biodiversity and Conservation, **18, 2223.**

Márialigeti S, Tinya F, Bidló A, Ódor P (2016) Environmental drivers of the composition and diversity

of the herb layer in mixed temperate forests in Hungary. Plant Ecology, 217, 549-563.


-----

Nascimbene J, Dainese M, Sitzia T (2013) Contrasting responses of epiphytic and dead wood-dwelling

lichen diversity to forest management abandonment in silver fir mature woodlands. Forest

Ecology and Management, **289, 325-332.**

Ódor P, Király I, Tinya F, Bortignon F, Nascimbene J (2013) Patterns and drivers of species

composition of epiphytic bryophytes and lichens in managed temperate forests. Forest Ecology

and Management, **306, 256-265.**

Persiani AM, Audisio P, Lunghini D et al. (2010) Linking taxonomical and functional biodiversity of

saproxylic fungi and beetles in broad-leaved forests in southern Italy with varying management

histories. Plant Biosystems, 144, 250-261.

Sabatini FM, Burrascano S, Azzella MM et al. (2016) One taxon does not fit all: Herb-layer diversity

and stand structural complexity are weak predictors of biodiversity in Fagus sylvatica forests.

Ecological Indicators, 69, 126-137.

Sitzia T, Trentanovi G, Dainese M, Gobbo G, Lingua E, Sommacal M (2012) Stand structure and plant

species diversity in managed and abandoned silver fir mature woodlands. Forest Ecology and

Management, **270, 232-238.**

Sitzia T, Campagnaro T, Dainese M et al. (2017) Contrasting multi-taxa diversity patterns between

abandoned and non-intensively managed forests in the southern Dolomites. Iforest
Biogeosciences and Forestry, 10, 845.

Sitzia T, Campagnaro T, Gatti E, Sommacal M, Kotze D (2015) Wildlife conservation through forestry

abandonment: responses of beetle communities to habitat change in the Eastern Alps. European

Journal of Forest Research, 134, 511-524.

Sopp L, Kolozs L (2000) Fatömegszámítási táblázatok [Tables for calculating wood volume] Budapest,

Állami Erdészeti Szolgálat.

Tabacchi G, Di Cosmo L, Gasparini P, Morelli S (2011) Stima del volume e della fitomassa delle

principali specie forestali italiane. Equazioni di previsione, tavole del volume e tavole della

fitomassa arborea epigea. Consiglio per la Ricerca e la sperimentazione in Agricoltura, Unità di

Ricerca per il Monitoraggio e la Pianificazione Forestale. Trento. 412 pp. Trento: Consiglio per la

Ricerca e la sperimentazione in Agricoltura, Unita di Ricerca per il Monitoraggio e la Pianificazione

Forestale (in Italian).

**_Nomenclatures and checklists_**

Animals: 1) http://www.fauna-eu.org/ 2) http://www.gbif.org/ 3) http://www.organismnames.com/

4) https://inpn.mnhn.fr/accueil/index

Bryophytes: Hodgetts N (2015) Checklist and Country Status of European Bryophytes: Towards a New

Red List for Europe, National Parks and Wildlife Service.


-----

Fungi: http://www.indexfungorum.org/names/names.asp

Lichens: Nimis, P.L., Martellos, S., 2008. ITALIC – The Information System on Italian Lichens,Version

4.0. University of Trieste, Dept. of Biology,

IN4.0/1(http://dbiodbs.univ.trieste.it/http://dbiodbs.univ.trieste.it/).

Plants: The Plant List (2013). Version 1.1. Published on the Internet; http://www.theplantlist.org/

(accessed July 2016).


-----

_Table S3 – Diagnostics of boosted regression tree models modelling multidiversity and the scaled richness of_

_different taxonomic groups._

**Cross-Validated**


**Cross-Validated**

**correlation**

**(standard error)**


**Number of**

**observations**


**Learning**

**rate**


**Number**

**of trees**


**Total**

**Deviation**


**Residual**

**Deviation**


**correlation**

**(mean)**


**Multidiversity** 352 0.0025 1450 0.005 0.001 0.786 0.025

**Beetles** 307 0.005 650 0.010 0.002 0.785 0.020

**Birds** 272 0.0025 1450 0.024 0.004 0.838 0.021

**Bryophytes** 180 0.005 800 0.011 0.003 0.722 0.040

**Fungi** 248 0.05 5550 0.007 0.000 0.711 0.045

**Lichens** 179 0.01 200 0.011 0.006 0.528 0.067

**Plants** 352 0.01 250 0.009 0.004 0.668 0.039


-----

_Figure S1 – Partial dependency plots of the relationship between the scaled richness of beetles and the six top-performing_

_explanatory variables as modelled through a Boosted Regression Tree. Scaled richness represents the fraction of species of_

_the estimated species pool size observed in a given plot. Tick marks on the x-axis represent above-ground C data_

_distribution. For each variable we report in parenthesis its relative importance._


-----

_Figure S2 – Partial dependency plots of the relationship between the scaled richness of birds and the six top-performing_

_explanatory variables as modelled through a Boosted Regression Tree._


-----

_Figure S3 – Partial dependency plots of the relationship between the scaled richness of bryophytes and the six top-_

_performing explanatory variables as modelled through a Boosted Regression Tree._


-----

_Figure S4 - Partial dependency plots of the relationship between the scaled richness of fungi and the six top-_

_performing explanatory variables as modelled through a Boosted Regression Tree._


-----

_Figure S5 - Partial dependency plots of the relationship between the scaled richness of lichens and the six top-performing_

_explanatory variables as modelled through a Boosted Regression Tree._


-----

_Figure S6 - Partial dependency plots of the relationship between the scaled richness of plants and the six top-performing_

_explanatory variables as modelled through a Boosted Regression Tree._


-----

_Figure S7 – Partial dependency plots of the relationship between the scaled richness of multidiversity and the six top-_

_performing explanatory variables as modelled through a Boosted Regression Tree._


-----

_Figure S8 – Diving board plot of species-specific change-points for pure and reliable indicator species in oak-dominated_

_forests. For win-win species, the horizontal lines extend from the highest observed above-ground C value to the 5[th] percentile_

_of the permuted distribution of change-points. For trade-off species the horizontal lines extend from the lowest observed_

_above-ground C value to the 95[th] percentile. The size of the symbols is proportional to species’ indicator value (z-scores)._

_Only species having a level of purity and reliability higher than 0.95 were reported. We reported the limits of the confidence_

_interval, as these conservatively indicate the point along the above-ground C gradient above (below) which the trade-off_

_(win-win) species potentially decline (increase)._


-----

_Figure S9 – Diving board plot of species-specific change-points for pure and reliable indicator species in beech forests._

_Symbols as in Figure S8_


-----

-----

